# sefh-deepfake-detector
Ultra lightweight deepfake detector based on linear algebra for the Science and Engineering Fair of Houston. 

# Abstract
The deepfake content generation industry has been rapidly accelerating, in both quality and accessibility. This artificially generated content has recently been spreading rapidly across social media platforms, reshaping critical parts of financial fraud industries and shaking the foundation of political integrity. Specifically, videos have recently risen into focus as they tend to be more convincing and easily spread across online communities. Current deepfake detection methods are often based on convolutional neural networks, require a massive amount of processing power to train large datasets, and have slow inference times. This study details the use of linear algebra techniques to detect deepfakes; specifically, utilizing singular value decomposition (SVD) on a Casorati matrix to gather invariant features from synthetic media. These features were combined with the isolation of the chrominance red (Cr) color space to detect Bayer filter violations to more accurately classify footage. Attributes of the Casorati matrix; namely, the entropy of the singular values and trailing singular values, were combined with color physics to create an ensemble machine learning model. The model achieved a 93.1% accuracy score after being trained sequentially in under 20 seconds on a standard laptop CPU, highlighting the efficiency of linear algebra-based models. Fast-inference and low computation models can be used on social media platforms to classify the large amounts of short-form content as synthetic in real-time.  

# Replication

Create a folder called data, and two subfolders called real and deepfake. Add your data into these two folders and run the program. Data used in the original paper was taken from https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/sanikatiwarekar/deep-fake-detection-dfd-entire-original-dataset.
